feat(docs): Add schema customization docs (#13832)
gatsbyjs/gatsby: docs/docs/schema-customization.md

# Customizing the GraphQL Schema

One of Gatsby's main strengths is the ability to query data from a variety of
sources in a uniform way with GraphQL. For this to work, a GraphQL Schema must
be generated that defines the shape of the data.

Gatsby is able to automatically infer a GraphQL Schema from your data, and in
many cases this is really all you need. There are however situations when you
either want to explicitly define the data shape, or add custom functionality to
the query layer - this is what Gatsby's Schema Customization API provides.

The following guide walks through a basic example to showcase the API.

> 

Reviewer: What do you think about adding a section describing the target audience for this guide, and any prerequisite knowledge? 

The target audience might be something like plugin authors, developers optimising builds for larger sites, or anyone interested in learning more about how Gatsby uses GraphQL. 

Required knowledge could be some understanding of using `gatsby-node.js` to customise your site's build, along with basic familiarity with GraphQL's types and schemas?

file is hereby transformed into a "node" object in the internal data store with
a unique `id` and a type `MarkdownRemark`. Similarly, an author will be
represented by a node object of type `AuthorJson`, and contributor info will be
transformed into node objects of type `ContributorJson`.

## The Node interface

This data structure is represented in Gatsby's GraphQL schema with the `Node`
interface, which describes the set of fields common to node objects created by
source and transformer plugins (`id`, `parent`, `children`, as well as a couple
of `internal` fields like `type`). In GraphQL Schema Definition Language (SDL),
it looks like this:

```graphql
interface Node {
  id: ID!
  parent: Node!
  children: [Node!]!
  internal: Internal!
}

type Internal {
  type: String!
}
```

Types created by source and transformer plugins implement this interface. For
example, the node type created by `gatsby-transformer-json` for `authors.json`
will be represented in the GraphQL schema as:

```graphql
type AuthorJson implements Node {
  id: ID!
  parent: Node!
  children: [Node!]!
  internal: Internal!
  name: String
  firstName: String
  email: String
  joinedAt: Date
}
```

> 

Reviewer 2: maybe add a section how i find the generated schemas?

Reviewer 2: I ask this because I tried to get India and the only way was via the docs section in the iql explorer. But there was no place where I get exactly the scheme definition (for copy paste etc) which you posted in the code snippets

Author: the GraphQL Playground also has a `Schema` tab, you can get it if you start with
```shell
GATSBY_GRAPHQL_IDE=playground gatsby develop
```
is that what you mean?

Reviewer 2: ah - yes :)

it would be helpful to note this option and the schema tab to see the resulting schema better.

or make a note with a link to this:
https://www.gatsbyjs.org/docs/why-gatsby-uses-graphql/
https://www.gatsbyjs.org/docs/using-graphql-playground/

Let's take the latter case first. Assume a new author joins the team, but in the
new author entry there is a typo on the `joinedAt` field: "201-04-02" which is
not a valid Date.

```diff:title=src/data/author.json
+  {
+    "name": "Doe",
+    "firstName": "John",
+    "email": "john@example.com",
+    "joinedAt": "201-04-02"
+  }
]
```

This will confuse Gatsby's type inference since the `joinedAt`
field will now have both Date and String values.

### Fixing field types

To ensure that the field will always be of Date type, you can provide explicit
type definitions to Gatsby with the `createTypes` action. It accepts type
definitions in GraphQL Schema Definition Language:

```js:title=gatsby-node.js
exports.sourceNodes = ({ actions }) => {
  const { createTypes } = actions
  const typeDefs = `
    type AuthorJson implements Node {
      joinedAt: Date
    }
  `
  createTypes(typeDefs)
}
```

Note that the rest of the fields (`name`, `firstName` etc.) don't have to be
provided, they will still be handled by Gatsby's type inference.

> Although the `createTypes` action is passed to all `gatsby-node` APIs,
> it has to be called before schema generation. We recommend to use the

> > `sourceNodes` API.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
> [`sourceNodes` API](https://gatsby.dev/api).
```

Author: Thanks! Let's directly link to `sourceNodes` docs though?

Reviewer 2: I don't know if we can link to the section with the URL shortener

without also specifying that this is the type of the `frontmatter` field on the
`MarkdownRemark` type, The following would fail because Gatsby would have no way
of knowing which field the `Frontmatter` type should be applied to:

```js:title=gatsby-node.js
exports.sourceNodes = ({ actions }) => {
  const { createTypes } = actions
  const typeDefs = `
    # This will fail!!!
    type Frontmatter {
      tags: [String]!
    }
  `
  createTypes(typeDefs)
}
```

It is useful to think about your data, and the corresponding GraphQL schema, by
alwas starting from the Node types created by source and transformer plugins.

> Note that the `Frontmatter` type must not implement the Node interface since
> it is not a top-level type created by source or transformer plugins: it has no
> `id` field, and is just there to describe the data shape on a nested field.

### Gatsby Type Builders

In many cases, GraphQL SDL provides a succinct way to provide type definitions
for your schema. If however you need more flexibility, `createTypes` also
accepts `graphql-js` types, as well as definitions provided with the help of
Gatsby Type Builders, which are more flexible than SDL syntax but less verbose

> than `graphql-js`. They are accessible on the `schema` argument passed to Node

Reviewer: I feel like mentioning `graphql-js` types together with Gatsby Type Builders is a bit confusing here. This could just talk about Gatsby Type Builders, then mention `graphql-js` types after the code example?

Author: :+1: Yes thats better!

APIs.

```js
exports.sourceNodes = ({ actions, schema }) => {
  const { createTypes } = actions
  const typeDefs = [
    schema.buildObjectType({
      name: "ContributorJson",
      fields: {
        name: "String!",
        firstName: "String!",
        email: "String!",
        receivedSwag: {
          type: "Boolean",
          resolve: source => source.receivedSwag || false,
        },
      },
      interfaces: ["Node"],
    }),
  ]
  createTypes(typeDefs)
}
```

Gatsby Type Builders allow referencing types as simple strings, and accept full

> field configs ('type', 'args', 'resolve').

Reviewer: Could this link to some external docs on field configs?

Author: Good idea! Not sure where to link though? To `graphql-js` docs (which is not 100% the same syntax), or `graphql-compose` docs (which is the better option, but we don't mention it anywhere else in the docs, so might be confusing?

> field configs ('type', 'args', 'resolve').

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
field configs (`type`, `args`, `resolve`).
```

definitions using Gatsby Type Builders, an alternative approach specifically
tailored towards adding custom resolvers to fields is the `createResolvers` Node
API.

```js
exports.createResolvers = ({ createResolvers }) => {
  const resolvers = {
    Frontmatter: {
      author: {
        resolve(source, args, context, info) {
          return context.nodeModel.getNodeById({
            id: source.author,
            type: "AuthorJson",
          })
        },
      },
    },
  }
  createResolvers(resolvers)
}
```

Note that `createResolvers` allows adding new fields to types, modifying `args`
and `resolver` -- but not overriding the field type. This is because
`createResolvers` is run last in schema generation, and modifying a field type
would mean having to regenerate corresponding input types (`filter`, `sort`),
which we want to avoid. If possible, specifying field types should be done with
the `createTypes` action.

## Accessing Gatsby's data store from field resolvers

As mentioned above, Gatsby's internal data store and query capabilities are
available to custom field resolvers on the `context.nodeModel` argument passed

> to every resolver. Accessing node(s) by `id` (and optional type) is possible

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
to every resolver. Accessing node(s) by `id` (and optional `type`) is possible
```

When creating custom field resolvers, it is important to ensure that Gatsby
knows about the data a page depends on for hot reloading to work properly. When
you retrieve nodes from the store with `context.nodeModel` methods, it is
usually not necessary to do anything manually, because Gatsby will register
dependencies for the query results automatically. The exception is `getAllNodes`
which will _not_ register data dependencies by default. This is because
requesting re-running of queries when any node of a certain type changes is
potentially a very expensive operation. If you are sure you really need this,
you can add a page data dependency either programmatically with
`context.nodeModel.trackPageDependencies`, or with:

```js
context.nodeModel.getAllNodes(
  { type: "MarkdownRemark" },
  { connectionType: "MarkdownRemark" }
)
```

# Custom Interfaces and Unions

Finally, let's say we want to have a page on our example blog that lists all
team members (authors and contributors). What we could do is have two queries,
one for `allAuthorJson` and one for `allContributorJson` and manually merge
those. GraphQL however provides a more elegant solution to these kinds of

> problems with "abstract types" (Interfaces amd Unions). Since authors and

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
problems with "abstract types" (Interfaces and Unions). Since authors and
```

# Customizing the GraphQL Schema

One of Gatsby's main strengths is the ability to query data from a variety of
sources in a uniform way with GraphQL. For this to work, a GraphQL Schema must
be generated that defines the shape of the data.

Gatsby is able to automatically infer a GraphQL Schema from your data, and in
many cases this is really all you need. There are however situations when you
either want to explicitly define the data shape, or add custom functionality to
the query layer - this is what Gatsby's Schema Customization API provides.

> The following guide walks through a basic example to showcase the API.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The following guide walks through some examples to showcase the API.
```

Reviewer 3: The Floating Table of Contents would really help here! (coming up in #6896)

> This guide is aimed at plugin authors, users trying to fix GraphQL schemas
> created by automatic type inference, developers optimising builds for larger
> sites, and anyone interested in customizing Gatsby's schema generation.
> As such, the guide assumes that you're somewhat familiar with GraphQL types
> and with using Gatsby's Node APIs.

> # Explicitly defining data types

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
## Explicitly defining data types
```
There should only be one h1 per page.

have occasional guest contributors whose info we keep in a separate JSON file.

```markdown:title=src/data/post1.md
---
title: Sample Post
publishedAt: 2019-04-01
author: jane@example.com
tags:
  - wow
---

# Heading

Text
```

```json:title=src/data/author.json
[
  {
    "name": "Doe",
    "firstName": "Jane",
    "email": "jane@example.com",
    "joinedAt": "2018-01-01"
  }
]
```

```json:title=src/data/contributor.json
[
  {
    "name": "Doe",
    "firstName": "Zoe",
    "email": "zoe@example.com",
    "receivedSwag": true
  }
]
```

To be able to query the contents of these files with GraphQL, we need to first
load them into Gatsby's internal data store. This is what source and transformer
plugin accomplish - in this case `gatsby-source-filesystem` and
`gatsby-transformer-remark` plus `gatsby-transformer-json`. Every markdown post
file is hereby transformed into a "node" object in the internal data store with
a unique `id` and a type `MarkdownRemark`. Similarly, an author will be
represented by a node object of type `AuthorJson`, and contributor info will be
transformed into node objects of type `ContributorJson`.

> ## The Node interface

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
### The Node interface
```

This data structure is represented in Gatsby's GraphQL schema with the `Node`
interface, which describes the set of fields common to node objects created by
source and transformer plugins (`id`, `parent`, `children`, as well as a couple
of `internal` fields like `type`). In GraphQL Schema Definition Language (SDL),
it looks like this:

```graphql
interface Node {
  id: ID!
  parent: Node!
  children: [Node!]!
  internal: Internal!
}

type Internal {
  type: String!
}
```

Types created by source and transformer plugins implement this interface. For
example, the node type created by `gatsby-transformer-json` for `authors.json`
will be represented in the GraphQL schema as:

```graphql
type AuthorJson implements Node {
  id: ID!
  parent: Node!
  children: [Node!]!
  internal: Internal!
  name: String
  firstName: String
  email: String
  joinedAt: Date
}
```

> A quick way to inspect the schema generated by Gatsby is the GraphQL Playground.
> Start your project with `GATSBY_GRAPHQL_IDE=playground gatsby develop`, open the
> playground at `http://localhost:8000/___graphql` and inspect the `Schema` tab on
> the right.

> ## Automatic type inference

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
### Automatic type inference
```

It's important to note that the data in `author.json` does not provide type
information of the Author fields by itself. In order to translate the data
shape into GraphQL type definitions, Gatsby has to inspect the contents of
every field and check its type. In many cases this works very well and it is
still the default mechanism for creating a GraphQL schema.

There are however two problems with this approach: (1) it is quite
time-consuming and therefore does not scale very well and (2) if the values on a
field are of different types Gatsby cannot decide which one is the correct one.
A consequence of this is that if your data sources change, type inference could
suddenly fail.

Both problems can be solved by providing explicit type definitions for Gatsby's
GraphQL schema.

> ## Creating type definitions

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
### Creating type definitions
```

Let's take the latter case first. Assume a new author joins the team, but in the
new author entry there is a typo on the `joinedAt` field: "201-04-02" which is
not a valid Date.

```diff:title=src/data/author.json
+  {
+    "name": "Doe",
+    "firstName": "John",
+    "email": "john@example.com",
+    "joinedAt": "201-04-02"
+  }
]
```

This will confuse Gatsby's type inference since the `joinedAt`
field will now have both Date and String values.

> ### Fixing field types

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
#### Fixing field types
```

To ensure that the field will always be of Date type, you can provide explicit
type definitions to Gatsby with the `createTypes` action. It accepts type
definitions in GraphQL Schema Definition Language:

```js:title=gatsby-node.js
exports.sourceNodes = ({ actions }) => {
  const { createTypes } = actions
  const typeDefs = `
    type AuthorJson implements Node {
      joinedAt: Date
    }
  `
  createTypes(typeDefs)
}
```

Note that the rest of the fields (`name`, `firstName` etc.) don't have to be
provided, they will still be handled by Gatsby's type inference.

> Although the `createTypes` action is passed to all `gatsby-node` APIs,
> it has to be called before schema generation. We recommend to use the
> [`sourceNodes` API](https://gatsby.dev/api/#sourceNodes).

> ### Opting out of type inference

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
#### Opting out of type inference
```

There are however advantages to providing full definitions for a node type, and
bypassing the type inference mechanism altogether. With smaller scale projects
inference is usually not a performance problem, but as projects grow the
performance penalty of having to check each field type will become noticable.

Gatsby allows to opt out of inference with the `@dontInfer` type directive - which
in turn requires that you explicitly provide type definitions for all fields
that should be available for querying:

```js:title=gatsby-node.js
exports.sourceNodes = ({ actions }) => {
  const { createTypes } = actions
  const typeDefs = `
    type AuthorJson implements Node @dontInfer {
      name: String!
      firstName: String!
      email: String!
      joinedAt: Date
    }
  `
  createTypes(typeDefs)
}
```

Note that you don't need to explicitly provide the Node interface fields (`id`,
`parent`, etc.), Gatsby will automatically add them for you.

> > If you wonder about the exclamation marks - those allow specifying nullability

Author: Done

> in GraphQL, i.e. if a field value is allowed to be `null` or not.

> ### Nested types

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
#### Nested types
```

exports.sourceNodes = ({ actions }) => {
  const { createTypes } = actions
  const typeDefs = `
    type MarkdownRemark implements Node {
      frontmatter: Frontmatter
    }
    type Frontmatter {
      tags: [String!]!
    }
  `
  createTypes(typeDefs)
}
```

Note that with `createTypes` we cannot directly target a `Frontmatter` type
without also specifying that this is the type of the `frontmatter` field on the
`MarkdownRemark` type, The following would fail because Gatsby would have no way
of knowing which field the `Frontmatter` type should be applied to:

```js:title=gatsby-node.js
exports.sourceNodes = ({ actions }) => {
  const { createTypes } = actions
  const typeDefs = `
    # This will fail!!!
    type Frontmatter {
      tags: [String]!
    }
  `
  createTypes(typeDefs)
}
```

It is useful to think about your data, and the corresponding GraphQL schema, by
always starting from the Node types created by source and transformer plugins.

> Note that the `Frontmatter` type must not implement the Node interface since
> it is not a top-level type created by source or transformer plugins: it has no
> `id` field, and is just there to describe the data shape on a nested field.

> ### Gatsby Type Builders

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
#### Gatsby Type Builders
```

for your schema. If however you need more flexibility, `createTypes` also
accepts type definitions provided with the help of Gatsby Type Builders, which
are more flexible than SDL syntax but less verbose than `graphql-js`. They are
accessible on the `schema` argument passed to Node APIs.

```js:title=gatsby-node.js
exports.sourceNodes = ({ actions, schema }) => {
  const { createTypes } = actions
  const typeDefs = [
    schema.buildObjectType({
      name: "ContributorJson",
      fields: {
        name: "String!",
        firstName: "String!",
        email: "String!",
        receivedSwag: {
          type: "Boolean",
          resolve: source => source.receivedSwag || false,
        },
      },
      interfaces: ["Node"],
    }),
  ]
  createTypes(typeDefs)
}
```

Gatsby Type Builders allow referencing types as simple strings, and accept full
field configs (`type`, `args`, `resolve`).

> Type Builders also exist for Input, Interface and Union types:
> `buildInputType`, `buildInterfaceType`, and `buildUnionType`.
> Note that the `createTypes` action also accepts `graphql-js` types directly,
> but usually either SDL or Type Builders are the better alternatives.

> ### Foreign-key fields

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
#### Foreign-key fields
```

}
```

What is happening here is that we provide a custom field resolver that asks
Gatsby's internal data store for the the full node object with the specified
`id` and `type`.

Because creating foreign-key relations is such a common usecase, Gatsby
luckily also provides a much easier way to do this -- with the help of
extensions or directives. It looks like this:

```graphql
type MarkdownRemark implements Node {
  frontmatter: Frontmatter
}
type Frontmatter {
  author: AuthorJson @link # default foreign-key relation by `id`
  reviewers: [AuthorJson] @link(by: "email") # foreign-key relation by custom field
}
type AuthorJson implements Node {
  posts: [MarkdownRemark] @link(by: "frontmatter.author", from: "email") # easy back-ref
}
```

You simply provide a `@link` directive on a field and Gatbsy will internally
add a resolver that is quite similar to the one we wrote manually above. If no
argument is provided, Gatsby will use the `id` field as the foreign-key,
otherwise the foreign-key has to be provided with the `by` argument. The
optional `from` argument allows getting the foreign-keys from the specified
field, which is especially helpful when adding a field for back-linking.

> ### Extensions and directives

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
#### Extensions and directives
```

> Out of the box, Gatsby provides [four extensions](https://www.gatsbyjs.org/docs/actions/#createTypes)

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Out of the box, Gatsby provides [four extensions](/docs/actions/#createTypes)
```

that allow adding custom functionality to fields without having to manually
write field resolvers: the `link` extension has already been discussed above,
`dateformat` allows adding date formatting options, `fileByRelativePath` is
similar to `link` but will resolve relative paths when linking to `File` nodes,
and `proxy` is helpful when dealing with data that contains field names with
characteres that are invalid in GraphQL.

To add an extension to a field you can either use a directive in SDL, or the
`extensions` property when using Gatsby Type Builders:

```js:title=gatsby-node.js
exports.sourceNodes = ({ action, schema }) => {
  const { createTypes } = actions
  const typeDefs = [
    "type MarkdownRemark implements Node { frontmatter: Frontmatter }",
    `type Frontmatter {
      publishedAt: Date @dateformat(formatString: "DD-MM-YYYY")
    }`
    schema.buildObjectType({
      name: 'AuthorJson',
      fields: {
        joinedAt: {
          type: 'Date',
          extensions: {
            dateformat: {}
          }
        }
      }
    })
  ]
  createTypes(typeDefs)
}
```

> The above example adds [date formatting options](https://www.gatsbyjs.org/docs/graphql-reference/#dates)

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The above example adds [date formatting options](/docs/graphql-reference/#dates)
```

to the `AuthorJson.joinedAt` and the `MarkdownRemark.frontmatter.publishedAt`
fields. Those options are available as field arguments when querying those fields:

```graphql
query {
  allAuthorJson {
    joinedAt(fromNow: true)
  }
}
```

For `publishedAt` we also provide a default `formatString` which will be used
when no explicit formatting options are provided in the query.

> ### Setting default field values

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
#### Setting default field values
```

For setting default field values, Gatsby currently does not (yet) provide an
out-of-the-box extension, so resolving a field to a default value (instead of
`null`) requires manually adding a field resolver. For example, to add a default
tag to every blog post:

```js:title=gatsby-node.js
exports.sourceNodes = ({ action, schema }) => {
  const { createTypes } = actions
  const typeDefs = [
    "type MarkdownRemark implements Node { frontmatter: Frontmatter }",
    schema.buildObjectType({
      name: "Frontmatter",
      fields: {
        tags: {
          type: "[String!]",
          resolve(source, args, context, info) {
            // For a more generic solution, we could pick the field value from
            // `source[info.fieldName]`
            const { tags } = source
            if (source.tags == null || (Array.isArray(tags) && !tags.length)) {
              return ["uncategorized"]
            }
            return tags
          },
        },
      },
    }),
  ]
  createTypes(typeDefs)
}
```

> # createResolvers API

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
## createResolvers API
```
This would fix the heading level - there should only be one h1

While it is possible to directly pass `args` and `resolvers` along the type
definitions using Gatsby Type Builders, an alternative approach specifically
tailored towards adding custom resolvers to fields is the `createResolvers` Node
API.

```js:title=gatsby-node.js
exports.createResolvers = ({ createResolvers }) => {
  const resolvers = {
    Frontmatter: {
      author: {
        resolve(source, args, context, info) {
          return context.nodeModel.getNodeById({
            id: source.author,
            type: "AuthorJson",
          })
        },
      },
    },
  }
  createResolvers(resolvers)
}
```

Note that `createResolvers` allows adding new fields to types, modifying `args`
and `resolver` -- but not overriding the field type. This is because
`createResolvers` is run last in schema generation, and modifying a field type
would mean having to regenerate corresponding input types (`filter`, `sort`),
which we want to avoid. If possible, specifying field types should be done with
the `createTypes` action.

> ## Accessing Gatsby's data store from field resolvers

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
### Accessing Gatsby's data store from field resolvers
```

As mentioned above, Gatsby's internal data store and query capabilities are
available to custom field resolvers on the `context.nodeModel` argument passed
to every resolver. Accessing node(s) by `id` (and optional `type`) is possible

> with `getNodeById` and `getNodesByIds`. To get all nodes, or all nodes of a

Reviewer 3: Are these API methods defined anywhere else? I'm wondering about API docs for these where each method is in its own section in a repeatable format (in a separate doc?).

Reviewer 4: It's in `/docs/node-model`. Added a link.

certain type, use `getAllNodes`. And running a query from inside your resolver
functions can be accomplished with `runQuery`, which accepts `filter`, `sort`,
`limit` and `skip` query arguments.

We could for example add a field to the `AuthorJson` type that lists all recent
posts by an author:

```js:title=gatsby-node.js
exports.createResolvers = ({ createResolvers }) => {
  const resolvers = {
    AuthorJson: {
      recentPosts: {
        type: ["MarkdownRemark"],
        resolve(source, args, context, info) {
          return context.nodeModel.runQuery({
            query: {
              filter: {
                frontmatter: {
                  author: { eq: source.email },
                  date: { gt: "2019-01-01" },
                },
              },
            },
            type: "MarkdownRemark",
            firstOnly: false,
          })
        },
      },
    },
  }
  createResolvers(resolvers)
}
```

> ## Custom query fields

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
### Custom query fields
```

    Query: {
      contributorsWithSwag: {
        type: ["ContributorJson"],
        resolve(source, args, context, info) {
          return context.nodeModel.runQuery({
            query: {
              filter: {
                receivedSwag: { eq: true },
              },
            },
            type: "ContributorJson",
            firstOnly: false,
          })
        },
      },
    },
  }
  createResolvers(resolvers)
}
```

Because we might also be interested in the reverse - which contributors haven't
received their swag yet - why not add a (required) custom query arg?

```js:title=gatsby-node.js
exports.createResolvers = ({ createResolvers }) => {
  const resolvers = {
    Query: {
      contributors: {
        type: ["ContributorJson"],
        args: {
          receivedSwag: "Boolean!",
        },
        resolve(source, args, context, info) {
          return context.nodeModel.runQuery({
            query: {
              filter: {
                receivedSwag: { eq: args.receivedSwag },
              },
            },
            type: "ContributorJson",
            firstOnly: false,
          })
        },
      },
    },
  }
  createResolvers(resolvers)
}
```

> ## Taking care of Hot reloading

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
### Taking care of hot reloading
```

When creating custom field resolvers, it is important to ensure that Gatsby
knows about the data a page depends on for hot reloading to work properly. When
you retrieve nodes from the store with `context.nodeModel` methods, it is
usually not necessary to do anything manually, because Gatsby will register
dependencies for the query results automatically. The exception is `getAllNodes`
which will _not_ register data dependencies by default. This is because
requesting re-running of queries when any node of a certain type changes is
potentially a very expensive operation. If you are sure you really need this,
you can add a page data dependency either programmatically with
`context.nodeModel.trackPageDependencies`, or with:

```js
context.nodeModel.getAllNodes(
  { type: "MarkdownRemark" },
  { connectionType: "MarkdownRemark" }
)
```

> # Custom Interfaces and Unions

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
## Custom Interfaces and Unions
```

      email: String!
    }

    type AuthorJson implements Node & TeamMember {
      name: String!
      firstName: String!
      email: String!
      joinedAt: Date
    }

    type ContributorJson implements Node & TeamMember {
      name: String!
      firstName: String!
      email: String!
      receivedSwag: Boolean
    }
  `
}

exports.createResolvers = ({ createResolvers }) => {
  const fullName = {
    type: "String",
    resolve(source, args, context, info) {
      return source.firstName + " " + source.name
    },
  }
  const resolvers = {
    Query: {
      allTeamMembers: {
        type: ["TeamMember"],
        resolve(source, args, context, info) {
          return context.nodeModel.getAllNodes({ type: "TeamMember" })
        },
      },
    },
    AuthorJson: {
      fullName,
    },
    ContributorJson: {
      fullName,
    },
  }
  createResolvers(resolvers)
}
```

To use the newly added root query field in a page query to get the full names of
all team members, we can write:

```js
export const query = graphql`
  {
    allTeamMembers {
      ... on Author {
        fullName
      }
      ... on Contributor {
        fullName
      }
    }
  }
`
```

> # Extending third-party types

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
## Extending third-party types
```

So far, the examples have been dealing with types created from locally available data.
However, Gatsby also allows to integrate and modify third-party GraphQL schemas.

Usually, those third-party schemas are retrieved from remote sources via introspection
query with Gatsby's `gatsby-source-graphql` plugin. To customize types integrated from
a third-party schema, we can use the `createResolvers` API.

> ## Feeding remote images into `gatsby-image`

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
### Feeding remote images into `gatsby-image`
```

> As an [example](https://github.com/gatsbyjs/gatsby/blob/master/examples/using-gatsby-source-graphql/gatsby-node.js),

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
As an example,
```

> let's look at how we could use `createResolvers` to feed images from a

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
let's look at [using-gatsby-source-graphql](https://github.com/gatsbyjs/gatsby/blob/master/examples/using-gatsby-source-graphql/gatsby-node.js) to see how we could use `createResolvers` to feed images from a
```

    CMS_Asset: {
      imageFile: {
        type: `File`,
        resolve(source, args, context, info) {
          return createRemoteFileNode({
            url: source.url,
            store,
            cache,
            createNode,
            createNodeId,
          })
        },
      },
    },
  })
}
```

We create a new `imageFile` field on the `CMS_Asset` type, which will create `File`
nodes from every value on the `url` field. Since `File` nodes automatically have
`childImageSharp` convenience fields available, we can feed the images from the CMS
into `gatsby-image` by simply querying:

```graphql
query {
  cms {
    post {
      # In this example, the `post.image` field is of type `CMS_Asset`
      image {
        # It is important to include all fields in the query which we want to
        # access in the resolver. In this example we want to make sure to include
        # the `url` field. In the future, Gatsby might provide a `@projection`
        # extension to automatically include those fields.
        url
        imageFile {
          childImageSharp {
            fixed {
              ...GatsbyImageSharpFixed
            }
          }
        }
      }
    }
  }
}

> ```

Reviewer 3: I think this page could use a conclusion of some kind since it has so much prose in it. Maybe a quick recap of what was presented in the doc?
